Add `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` component (#1300)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs.md

Author: I'll run this as well.

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs/
description: Learn about otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs
title: otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs
---

# otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` accepts telemetry data from other `otelcol`

> components and reassociates spans, log records, and metric datapoints to a resource that matches the specified attributes. It groups telemetry data by specified attributes.

Reviewer: I would maybe remove this sentence "It groups telemetry data by specified attributes.". It does not add a lot of info. If we think that this is not clear enough, maybe an example would help

Author: I would remove that

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` is a wrapper over the upstream OpenTelemetry
Collector `groupbyattrs` processor. If necessary, bug reports or feature requests
will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

> It is recommended to use the groupbyattrs processor together with [otelcol.processor.batch][], as a consecutive step, as this will reduce the fragmentation of data (by grouping records together under matching Resource/Instrumentation Library)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend you use the groupbyattrs processor together with [otelcol.processor.batch][], as a consecutive step. This will reduce the fragmentation of data by grouping records together under the matching Resource/Instrumentation Library.
```

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` components by giving them
different labels.

## Usage

```river
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "LABEL" {
  output {
    metrics = [...]
    logs    = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

The following arguments are supported:

| Name            | Type              | Description                                                                           | Default | Required |
|-----------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|

> | `keys`          | `array(string)`   | Keys that will be used to group the spans, log records or metric data points together |         | no       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `keys`          | `array(string)`   | Keys that will be used to group the spans, log records, or metric data points together. |         | no       |
```

[output]: #output-block
[debug_metrics]: #debug_metrics-block

### keys
`keys` is a string array that is used for grouping the data. If it is empty, the processor performs compaction and reassociates all spans with matching Resource and InstrumentationLibrary.

### output block

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/output-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

### debug_metrics block

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-debug-metrics-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

| Name    | Type               | Description                                                   |
|---------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| `input` | `otelcol.Consumer` | Accepts `otelcol.Consumer` data for metrics, logs, or traces. |

`input` accepts `otelcol.Consumer` data for any telemetry signal (metrics,
logs, or traces).

## Component health

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
configuration.

## Debug information

> `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` does not expose any component-specific debug

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` doesn't expose any component-specific debug
```

information.

## Debug metrics

> `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` does not expose any component-specific debug metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` doesn't expose any component-specific debug metrics.
```

## Examples

> ### Grouping metrics by an attribute
> 
> This example reassociates the metrics based on the value of the `host.name` attribute.
> 
> ```alloy
> otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "default" {
>   keys = [
>     "host.name",
>   ]
> 
>   output {
>     metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
>     logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
>     traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
>   }
> }
> ```
> 
> ## Notes
> - The data points with different data types aren't merged under the same metric. For example, a gauge and sum metric would not be merged.
> - The data points without the specified keys remain under their respective resources.
> - New resources inherit the attributes of the original resource and the specified attributes in the keys array.
> - The grouping attributes in the keys array are removed from the output metrics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Grouping metrics

Consider the below metrics, all originally associated to the same Resource:

``
Resource {host.name="localhost",source="prom"}
  Metric "gauge-1" (GAUGE)
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-B",id="eth0"}
  Metric "gauge-1" (GAUGE) // Identical to previous Metric
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-B",id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (GAUGE)
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-B",id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (SUM)
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {host.name="host-A",id="eth0"}
  Metric "dont-move" (Gauge)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
``

With the below configuration, the groupbyattrs will re-associate the metrics with either `host-A` or `host-B`, based on the value of the `host.name` attribute.

``alloy
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "default" {
  keys = [ "host.name" ]

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
``

The output of the processor will therefore be:

``
Resource {host.name="localhost",source="prom"}
  Metric "dont-move" (Gauge)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}

Resource {host.name="host-A",source="prom"}
  Metric "gauge-1"
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (GAUGE)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (SUM)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}

Resource {host.name="host-B",source="prom"}
  Metric "gauge-1"
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (GAUGE)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
``

This output demonstrates how `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` works in various situations:

- The DataPoints for the `gauge-1` (GAUGE) metric were originally split under 2 Metric instances and have been merged in the output.
- The DataPoints of the `mixed-type` (GAUGE) and `mixed-type` (SUM) metrics have not been merged under the same Metric, because their DataType is different.
- The `dont-move` metric DataPoints don't have a `host.name` attribute and therefore remained under the original Resource.
- The new Resources inherited the attributes from the original Resource (`source="prom"`), plus the specified attributes from the processed metrics (`host.name="host-A"` or `host.name="host-B"`).
- The specified "grouping" attributes that are set on the new Resources are also removed from the metric DataPoints.
- While not shown in the above example, the processor also merges collections of records under matching InstrumentationLibrary.
```

@clayton-cornell does this look ok? I copied it from the [upstream docs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.105.0/processor/groupbyattrsprocessor/README.md#grouping-metrics).

@kehindesalaam Note that you'd need to replace the `` with ```. I can't do it in the GitHub suggestion, because I can't escape the tick symbol inside suggestions.

Reviewer 2: @ptodev You can use codefence markdown in suggestions.. just use 4 backticks to wrap the suggestion block and the standard 3 backticks for code bloack.

Instead of `the below`, we can use `the following` (better grammatically).  I'll look at the info-flow a little deeper once it's applied and do another pass on the docs.

We have to be careful with 1:1 copied text from upstream - we should either directly link to it or note it's source (per whatever license upstream is using) if we copy it.

Author: I'll make the modification and also the adjustment Clayton suggested.

components and groups them under the same resource.

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` is a wrapper over the upstream OpenTelemetry
Collector `groupbyattrs` processor. If necessary, bug reports or feature requests
will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

We recommend you use the groupbyattrs processor together with [otelcol.processor.batch][], as a consecutive step. This will reduce the fragmentation of data by grouping records together under the matching Resource/Instrumentation Library.

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` components by giving them
different labels.

## Usage

```alloy
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "LABEL" {
  output {
    metrics = [...]
    logs    = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

The following arguments are supported:

| Name            | Type              | Description                                                                           | Default | Required |
|-----------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|

> | `keys`          | `list(string)`    | Keys that will be used to group the spans, log records or metric data points together |         | no       |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `keys`          | `list(string)`    | Keys that will be used to group the spans, log records or metric data points together. |         | no       |
```

    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
Resource {host.name="host-B",source="prom"}
  Metric "gauge-1"
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
  Metric "mixed-type" (GAUGE)
    DataPoint {id="eth0"}
```

This output demonstrates how `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` works in various situations:

- The DataPoints for the `gauge-1` (GAUGE) metric were originally split under 2 Metric instances and have been merged in the output.
- The DataPoints of the `mixed-type` (GAUGE) and `mixed-type` (SUM) metrics have not been merged under the same Metric, because their DataType is different.
- The `dont-move` metric DataPoints don't have a `host.name` attribute and therefore remained under the original Resource.
- The new Resources inherited the attributes from the original Resource (`source="prom"`), plus the specified attributes from the processed metrics (`host.name="host-A"` or `host.name="host-B"`).
- The specified "grouping" attributes that are set on the new Resources are also removed from the metric DataPoints.
- While not shown in the above example, the processor also merges collections of records under matching InstrumentationLibrary.

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

### Compaction

Sometimes telemetry data can become fragmented due to multiple duplicated ResourceSpans/ResourceLogs/ResourceMetrics objects.
This leads to additional memory consumption, increased processing costs, inefficient serialization and increase of the export requests. 
In such situations, `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` can be used to compact the data with matching Resource and InstrumentationLibrary properties.

For example, consider this input data:

```
Resource {host.name="localhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=1, ...}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="OtherLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=2, ...}
    
Resource {host.name="localhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=3, ...}
    
Resource {host.name="localhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=4, ...}
    
Resource {host.name="otherhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=5, ...}
```

You can use `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` with its default configuration to compact the data: 
```alloy
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "default" {
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

The output will be:

```
Resource {host.name="localhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=1, ...}
    Span {span_id=3, ...}
    Span {span_id=4, ...}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="OtherLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=2, ...}

Resource {host.name="otherhost"}
  InstrumentationLibrary {name="MyLibrary"}
  Spans
    Span {span_id=5, ...}
```
````

This example was taken from the [OTel docs](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/processor/groupbyattrsprocessor#section-readme).

Reviewer 2: @ptodev We have to be super careful about taking (copy/pasting) content - any content - from external sources including the OTel.  We are probably OK here, but this is something we need to keep in mind when pulling info from external sources :-)  https://developers.google.com/style/other-sources

Reviewer 2: Just t be clear, this suggestion should be OK as-is.

Reviewer 3: Hi, @kehindesalaam when the section from this suggestion is added, I'll give the PR a final look and will likely ✅  it. Thank you for your contributions!

Author: I missed this 😅

> [otelcol.processor.batch]: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.batch/

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[otelcol.processor.batch]: ../otelcol.processor.batch/
```

> # otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs/
description: Learn about otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs
title: otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs
---

# otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs
```

We need at least this basic metadata

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` accepts telemetry data from other `otelcol`

> components and reassociates spans, log records and metric datapoints to a Resource that matches with the specified attributes. It groups telemetry data by specified attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
components and reassociates spans, log records, and metric datapoints to a resource that matches the specified attributes. It groups telemetry data by specified attributes.
```

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` is a wrapper over the upstream OpenTelemetry

> Collector `groupbyattrs` processor.  If necessary, bug reports or feature requests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collector `groupbyattrs` processor. If necessary, bug reports or feature requests
```

will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

> It is recommended to use the groupbyattrs processor together with batch processor, as a consecutive step, as this will reduce the fragmentation of data (by grouping records together under matching Resource/Instrumentation Library)

Author: I'll do that thank you.

> It is recommended to use the groupbyattrs processor together with batch processor, as a consecutive step, as this will reduce the fragmentation of data (by grouping records together under matching Resource/Instrumentation Library)

Reviewer 2: There are probably some other changes that will be required here once the other update is applied

> It is recommended to use the groupbyattrs processor together with batch processor, as a consecutive step, as this will reduce the fragmentation of data (by grouping records together under matching Resource/Instrumentation Library)

Author: done

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` components by giving them
different labels.

## Usage

```river
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "LABEL" {
  output {
    metrics = [...]
    logs    = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

The following arguments are supported:

Name | Type            | Description                                                                           | Default    | Required
---- |-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------| --------
`keys` | `array(string)` | Keys that will be used to group the spans, log records or metric data points together | | no

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

Name    | Type               | Description
--------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------

> `input` | `otelcol.Consumer` | A value that other components can use to send telemetry data to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`input` | `otelcol.Consumer` |  Accepts `otelcol.Consumer` data for metrics, logs, or traces.
```

I'm not sure about this description. I don't think components can send data to a value... what if we pulled up the extended description. If this works, we could remove lines 46 and 47.

Author: I'll look into that

Author: There is no extended description for this section. All the files have copies of the same thing. It is a good ideaa to make this part into a separate file. I would assume it is the same for all otelcol processors

`input` accepts `otelcol.Consumer` data for any telemetry signal (metrics,
logs, or traces).

## Component health

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
configuration.

## Debug information

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` does not expose any component-specific debug
information.

## Debug metrics

`otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs` does not expose any component-specific debug metrics.

## Examples

### Grouping metrics by an attribute

This example reassociates the metrics based on the value of the `host.name` attribute.

```alloy
otelcol.processor.groupbyattrs "default" {
  keys = [
    "host.name",
  ]

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

> ## Notes

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking commen.
I'm not sure that this info is best grouped under a `Notes` heading.  I'll leave it as-is... just noting it here in the review that this is not used elsewhere, and it might be better to rethink how this information is presented. It's something we can put off to a future PR.

Author: I moved the last note as part of the documentation for the Keys attribute

> - The data points with different data types would not be merged under the same metric (e.g a gauge and sum metric would not be merged).
> - The data points without the specified keys would remain under their respective resources.
> - New resources would inherit the attributes of the original resource and the specified attributes in the keys array.
> - The grouping attributes in the keys array would be removed from the output metrics.
> - If the keys array is empty, the processor would perform compaction and re-associate all spans with matching Resource and InstrumentationLibrary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The data points with different data types aren't merged under the same metric. For example, a gauge and sum metric would not be merged.
- The data points without the specified keys remain under their respective resources.
- New resources inherit the attributes of the original resource and the specified attributes in the keys array.
- The grouping attributes in the keys array are removed from the output metrics.
- If the keys array is empty, the processor performs compaction and reassociates all spans with matching Resource and InstrumentationLibrary.
```
